The proper application of the bioinformatics components involves 
evaluating data and interpreting results in a biologically relevant 
manner, such as data from next-generation DNA sequencing, protein 
sequencing, RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), gene expression profiles, and 
metabolic pathways, and molecular markers. The most widely used 
software/tools for large biological data include, Strand NGS, CLC Genomics Workbench, Lasergene Genomics Suite, NextGENe, Partek Genomics Suite, Genomatix, FreeBayes, Nanopore, GenomeComb, SIFT, 
PANTHER, Genome Track Analyzer, etc. Strand NGS is an integrated 
platform that provides tools for analyzing, managing, and visualizing 
next-generation sequencing data (https://www.strand-ngs.com/fea 
tures). In addition to supporting RNA-Seq and DNA-Seq workflows 
[11], it supports microRNA-Seq protocols [12] as well as protocols, for 
variant calling [13]. The CLC Genomics Workbench (QIAGEN) provides 
a comprehensive analysis package for analyzing and visualizing NGS 
data. Additionally, it includes all the sequence analysis tools of CLC 
Main Workbench. Several studies have reported the use of the CLC genomics workbench for the NGS data analysis including de novo assembly 
and RNA-Seq data analysis [14], mitochondrial DNA analysis [15], etc. 
All bioinformatics tools mentioned above have been used by many researchers for high throughput analysis of whole genome sequencing, 
transcriptome analysis, metagenomics, and metabarcoding data 
[16–18]. 
Bioinformatics software and sequencing technologies have transformed biomedical research in aquaculture and fisheries sectors to 
address aquaculture and fisheries issues. NGS technology and other 
bioinformatics tools are becoming increasingly affordable. On the other 
hand, gathering a tremendous amount of genome data in the form of 
millions or billions of short reads, annotating the genome, identifying 
nucleotide variations, classifying RNA molecules, and identifying molecular markers in a specific genome, among other things, remains 
problematic. Fortunately, with the advance in bioinformatics, several 
new software and tools are available for researchers to tackle these issues in aquaculture. Several applications of bioinformatics in aquaculture are given in Fig. 2. In this background, this review will highlight the 
possibilities of bioinformatics tools and their applications in the aquaculture industry